# bpfman Container Images

Container images for `bpfman` are automatically built and pushed to `quay.io/` under the
`:latest` tag whenever code is merged into the `main` branch of the
[bpfman](https://github.com/bpfman/bpfman) and [bpfman-operator](https://github.com/bpfman/bpfman-operator)
repositories.

* [quay.io/bpfman](https://quay.io/organization/bpfman):  This repository contains images needed
  to run bpfman.
  It contains the `xdp-dispatcher` and `tc-dispatcher` eBPF container images, which are used by
  bpfman to allow multiple XDP or TC programs to be loaded on a given interface.
  It also includes the container images which are used to deploy bpfman in a Kubernetes deployment:
    * **bpfman**: Packages all the bpfman binaries, including `bpfman` CLI, `bpfman-ns` and `bpfman-rpc`.
    * **bpfman-agent**: Agent that listens to KubeAPI Server and makes calls to bpfman to load or unload
      eBPF programs based on user intent.
    * **bpfman-operator**: Operator for deploying bpfman.
    * **tc-dispatcher**: eBPF container image containing the TC Dispatcher, which is used by bpfman
      to manage and allow multiple TC based programs to be loaded on a given TC hook point.
    * **xdp-dispatcher**: eBPF container image containing the XDP Dispatcher, which is used by bpfman
      to manage and allow multiple TC based programs to be loaded on a given XDP hook point.
    * **csi-node-driver-registrar**: CSI Driver used by bpfman.
    * **bpfman-operator-bundle**: Image containing all the CRDs (Custom-Resource-Definitions) used
      by bpfman-agent to define Kubernetes objects used to manage eBPF programs.
* [quay.io/bpfman-bytecode](https://quay.io/organization/bpfman-bytecode): This repository contains
  eBPF container images for all of the generated bytecode from 
  [examples/](https://github.com/bpfman/bpfman/tree/main/examples/) and
  [integration-test/](https://github.com/bpfman/bpfman/tree/main/tests/integration-test/bpf).
* [quay.io/bpfman-userspace](https://quay.io/organization/bpfman-userspace):  This repository contains
  userspace container images for all of the example programs in
  [examples/](https://github.com/bpfman/bpfman/tree/main/examples/).

## Multiple Architecture Support

All `bpfman` related container images that are automatically built and pushed to `quay.io/` contain a manifest file
and images built for the following architectures:

* x86_64
* arm64
* ppc64le
* s390x

## Locally Build bpfman-operator and bpfman-agent Container Images

When testing or developing in bpfman-operator, it may be necessary to run with updated changes
to the bpfman-operator or bpfman-agent container images.
The local Makefile will build and load both images based on the current changes: 

```sh
cd bpfman-operator/

make build-images
make run-on-kind
```

## Locally Build bpfman Container Image

When testing or developing in bpfman-operator, it may be necessary to run with updated changes
to bpfman.
By default, bpfman-agent uses `quay.io/bpfman/bpfman:latest`.
To build the bpfman binaries in a container image, run:

```sh
cd bpfman/

docker build -f ./Containerfile.bpfman.local . -t quay.io/$QUAY_USER/bpfman:test
```

Use any registry, image name and tag, above is just an example.
Next, build and deploy the bpfman-operator and bpfman-agent with the locally built bpfman container
image.

```sh
cd bpfman-operator/

BPFMAN_IMG=quay.io/$QUAY_USER/bpfman:test make build-images
BPFMAN_IMG=quay.io/$QUAY_USER/bpfman:test make run-on-kind
```

To use, the Kind cluster must have access to the image.
So either the image needs to be pushed to a registry and made public (make
public via the repo GUI after the push) before executing the `make run-on-kind`
command shown above:

```sh
docker push quay.io/$QUAY_USER/bpfman:test
```

OR it can be loaded into the kind cluster after the cluster is running:

```sh
kind load docker-image quay.io/$QUAY_USER/bpfman:test --name bpfman-deployment
```

Now the image should be running in the Kind cluster:

```sh
kubectl get pods -A
 NAMESPACE   NAME                               READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
 bpfman      bpfman-daemon-87fqg                3/3     Running   0          16m
 bpfman      bpfman-operator-7f67bc7c57-bc6lk   2/2     Running   0          16m
 :

kubectl describe pod -n bpfman bpfman-daemon-87fqg
 Name:             bpfman-daemon-87fqg
 Namespace:        bpfman
 :
 Containers:
  bpfman:
    Container ID:  containerd://1777d1810f3648f43df775e9d9af79406eaffc5694aa712da04c3f4e578093b3
    Image:         quay.io/$QUAY_USER/bpfman:test
    Image ID:      quay.io/$QUAY_USER/bpfman@sha256:f2c94b7acff6b463fc55232a1896816283521dd1ba5560b0d0779af99f811cd0
:
```

## Locally Build TC or XDP Dispatcher Container Image

The TC and XDP Dispatcher images are automatically built and pushed to `quay.io/` under the `:latest`
tag whenever code is merged into the `main` branch of the `github.com/bpfman/bpfman`.
If a dispatcher container image needs to be built locally, use the following steps.

Build the object files:

```sh
cargo xtask build-ebpf --libbpf-dir ~/src/libbpf/

$ ls .output/tc_dispatcher.bpf/
bpf_arm64_bpfel.o  bpf_powerpc_bpfel.o  bpf_s390_bpfeb.o  bpf_x86_bpfel.o

$ ls .output/xdp_dispatcher_v2.bpf/
bpf_arm64_bpfel.o  bpf_powerpc_bpfel.o  bpf_s390_bpfeb.o  bpf_x86_bpfel.o
```

Then build the bytecode image files:

```sh
bpfman image build -f Containerfile.bytecode -t quay.io/$QUAY_USER/tc-dispatcher:test -b .output/tc_dispatcher.bpf/bpf_x86_bpfel.o
bpfman image build -f Containerfile.bytecode -t quay.io/$QUAY_USER/xdp-dispatcher:test -b .output/xdp_dispatcher_v2.bpf/bpf_x86_bpfel.o
```

If a multi-arch image is needed, use:

```sh
bpfman image build -f Containerfile.bytecode.multi.arch -t quay.io/$QUAY_USER/tc-dispatcher:test -c .output/tc_dispatcher.bpf/
bpfman image build -f Containerfile.bytecode.multi.arch -t quay.io/$QUAY_USER/xdp-dispatcher:test -c .output/xdp_dispatcher_v2.bpf/
```

!!! Note
    To build images for multiple architectures on a local system, docker (or podman) may need additional configuration
    settings to allow for caching of non-native images. See 
    [https://docs.docker.com/build/building/multi-platform/](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/multi-platform/)
    for more details.

## Locally Build Example Container Images

The example images are automatically built and pushed to `quay.io/` under the `:latest` tag whenever code is
merged into the `main` branch of the `github.com/bpfman/bpfman`.
For each example, there is a bytecode and a userspace image.
For official bpfman images, bytecode images are pushed to
[quay.io/bpfman-bytecode](https://quay.io/organization/bpfman-bytecode) and userspace images are pushed to
[quay.io/bpfman-userspace](https://quay.io/organization/bpfman-userspace).
For example:

* [quay.io/bpfman-bytecode/go-kprobe-counter](https://quay.io/repository/bpfman-bytecode/go-kprobe-counter)
* [quay.io/bpfman-bytecode/go-tc-counter](https://quay.io/repository/bpfman-bytecode/go-tc-counter)
* [quay.io/bpfman-bytecode/go-tracepoint-counter](https://quay.io/repository/bpfman-bytecode/go-tracepoint-counter)
* ...

* [quay.io/bpfman-userspace/go-kprobe-counter](https://quay.io/repository/bpfman-userspace/go-kprobe-counter)
* [quay.io/bpfman-userspace/go-tc-counter](https://quay.io/repository/bpfman-userspace/go-tc-counter)
* [quay.io/bpfman-userspace/go-tracepoint-counter](https://quay.io/repository/bpfman-userspace/go-tracepoint-counter)
* ...

The Makefile in the examples directory has commands to build both sets of images.
Image names and tags can be controlled using environment variables.
If private images are being generated, both bytecode and userspace images will probably be pushed to the same
account, so bytecode and userspace images will need to be distinguished by either fully qualified image
names (using IMAGE_TC_BC, IMAGE_TC_US, IMAGE_XDP_BC, IMAGE_XDP_US, etc) or unique tags for each (TAG_BC,
TAG_US).
See `make help` in the examples directory and the samples below.

### Example Bytecode Container Images

If an example bytecode container image needs to be built locally, use the following to 
build the bytecode container image, (optionally passing the `USER_BC` and `TAG_BC` for the image):

```sh
# Build images for all eBPF program types
$ make build-bc-images USER_BC=$QUAY_USER TAG_BC=test-bc
:
 => pushing quay.io/$QUAY_USER/go-kprobe-counter:test-bc with docker
:
 => pushing quay.io/$QUAY_USER/go-tc-counter:test-bc with docker
:
 => pushing quay.io/$QUAY_USER/go-tracepoint-counter:test-bc with docker
:

-- OR --

# Build image for a single eBPF program type, XDP in this example
$ make build-bc-xdp USER_BC=$QUAY_USER TAG_BC=test-bc
:
 => pushing quay.io/$QUAY_USER/go-xdp-counter:test-bc with docker
```

If a multi-arch image is needed, use (appending `PLATFORM`):

```sh
$ make build-bc-xdp USER_BC=$QUAY_USER TAG_BC=test-bc PLATFORM=linux/amd64,linux/arm64,linux/ppc64le,linux/s390x
:
 => pushing quay.io/$QUAY_USER/go-xdp-counter:test-bc with docker
```

!!! Note
    To build images for multiple architectures on a local system, docker (or podman) may need additional configuration
    settings to allow for caching of non-native images. See 
    [https://docs.docker.com/build/building/multi-platform/](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/multi-platform/)
    for more details.

### Example Userspace Container Images

If an example userspace container image needs to be built locally, use the following to
build the userspace container images, (optionally passing the `USER_US` and `TAG_US` for the image):

```sh
cd bpfman/examples/

# Build all images
$ make build-us-images USER_US=$QUAY_USER TAG_US=test-us
:
 => pushing quay.io/$QUAY_USER/go-kprobe-counter:test-us with docker
:
 => pushing quay.io/$QUAY_USER/go-tc-counter:test-us with docker
:
 => pushing quay.io/$QUAY_USER/go-tracepoint-counter:test-us with docker
:

-- OR --

# Build a single image
$ make build-us-xdp USER_US=$QUAY_USER TAG_US=test-us
:
 => pushing quay.io/$QUAY_USER/go-xdp-counter:test-us with docker
```

If a multi-arch image is needed, use (appending `PLATFORM`):

```sh
$ make build-us-xdp USER_US=$QUAY_USER TAG_US=test-us PLATFORM=linux/amd64,linux/arm64,linux/ppc64le,linux/s390x
:
 => pushing quay.io/$QUAY_USER/go-xdp-counter:test-us with docker
```

!!! Note
    To build images for multiple architectures on a local system, docker (or podman) may need additional configuration
    settings to allow for caching of non-native images. See 
    [https://docs.docker.com/build/building/multi-platform/](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/multi-platform/)
    for more details.

## Adding Additional Container Images

When adding a new container image to one of the bpfman repositories, whether it be via the examples or
integration tests, several steps need to be performed.

* One of the maintainers of the bpfman quay.io repositories must:
    * Add the image to the quay.io repository.
    * Make the new image public.
    * On the image, provide `Write` access to the `bpfman+github_actions` robot account.
* Add the new image to the
  [bpfman/.github/workflows/image-build.yaml](https://github.com/bpfman/bpfman/blob/main/.github/workflows/image-build.yaml)
  so the image is built and pushed on each PR merge.
* For examples, update the `examples/Makefile` to build the new images.

## Signing Container Images

Signing eBPF container images is encouraged and can be easily done using
[cosign](https://docs.sigstore.dev/signing/quickstart/).
Below is a summary of the steps needed to sign an image.

First, install `cosign`:

```console
go install github.com/sigstore/cosign/v2/cmd/cosign@latest
```

Then sign the image.
The `cosign` command will generate a URL.
Follow the `sigstore` URL and login with either GitHub, Google to Microsoft.
That will generate a verification code that will complete the `cosign` command.

```console
cosign sign -y quay.io/$QUAY_USER/test-image@sha256:55fe3cfe46409939876be27f7ed4d2948842918145f6cda167d0c31fdea2046f
Generating ephemeral keys...
Retrieving signed certificate...
:
https://oauth2.sigstore.dev/auth/auth?access_type=online&client_id=sigstore&code_challenge=EwHYBahRxlbli-oEXxS9DoEzEWcyuS_f1lLBhntCVFI&code_challenge_method=S256&nonce=2kR9mJbP0eUxFBAQI9Nhs6LyS4l&redirect_uri=urn%3Aietf%3Awg%3Aoauth%3A2.0%3Aoob&response_type=code&scope=openid+email&state=2kR9mIqOn6IgmAw46BxVrnEEi0M
Enter verification code: wq3g58qhw6y25wwibcz2kgzfx

Successfully verified SCT...
tlog entry created with index: 120018072
Pushing signature to: quay.io/$QUAY_USER/test-image
```

## Containerfiles

There are multiple Containerfiles in the bpfman repositories.
Below is a summary of the files and their purpose.

### Userspace Containerfiles

* **bpfman/Containerfile.bpfman.local:** This file is used to create a userspace container image
  with bpfman binaries (`bpfman` CLI, `bpfman-rpc` and `bpfman-ns`).
  It can be used to run local bpfman code in a Kubernetes cluster with the `bpfman-operator` and `bpfman-agent`.
* **bpfman/Containerfile.bpfman.multi.arch:** This file is used to create a userspace container image
  with bpfman binaries (`bpfman` CLI, `bpfman-rpc` and `bpfman-ns`), but for multiple architectures.
  It is used by the `bpfman/.github/workflows/image-build.yaml` file to build bpfman multi-arch images
  on every github Pull Request merge.
  The resulting images are stored in `quay.io`.
* **bpfman/Containerfile.bpfman.openshift:** This file is used to create a userspace container image
  with bpfman binaries (`bpfman` CLI, `bpfman-rpc` and `bpfman-ns`).
  It is used by internal OpenShift build processes.
* **bpfman/examples/go-\*-counter/container-deployment/Containerfile.go-\*-counter:** Where '*' is one of the
  bpfman supported program types (tc, tcx, tracepoint, etc.).
  These files are used to create the userspace container images associated with the examples.
* **bpfman-operator/Containerfile.bpfman-agent:** This file is used to create a userspace
  container image with bpfman-agent.
* **bpfman-operator/Containerfile.bpfman-agent.openshift:** This file is used to create a userspace
  container image with bpfman-agent.
  It is used by internal OpenShift build processes.
* **bpfman-operator/Containerfile.bpfman-operator:** This file is used to create a userspace
  container image with bpfman-operator.
* **bpfman-operator/Containerfile.bpfman-operator.openshift:** This file is used to create a userspace
  container image with bpfman-operator.
  It is used by internal OpenShift build processes.
* **bpfman-operator/Containerfile.bundle:** This file is used to create a container image with
  all the Kubernetes object definitions (ConfigMaps, Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs), Roles,
  Role Bindings, Service, Service Accounts, etc) bpfman needs to be deployed in a Kubernetes cluster. 

### Bytecode Containerfiles

* **bpfman/Containerfile.bytecode:** This file is used to create a container image with eBPF bytecode
  packaged inside.
  The Containerfile applies labels to the container image describing the bytecode for consumers of the image.
  See [eBPF Bytecode Image Specifications](./shipping-bytecode.md) for more details.
* **bpfman/Containerfile.bytecode.multi.arch:** This file is used to create a container image with eBPF bytecode
  packaged inside, but packages eBPF bytecode for multiple architectures.
  The Containerfile applies labels to the container image describing the bytecode for consumers of the image.
  See [eBPF Bytecode Image Specifications](./shipping-bytecode.md) for more details.
